[Docs revamp 2/N] New doc for managing data (#8034)
PyTorchLightning/pytorch-lightning: docs/source/guides/data.rst

Managing Data
#############

Continue reading to learn about:

* `<Data Containers in Lightning_>`_

* `Iterate over multiple datasets <Multiple DataSets_>`_

* `Handle sequential data <Sequential Data_>`_

****************************
Data Containers in Lightning
****************************

There are a few different Data containers used in Lightning:

.. list-table:: Data objects
   :widths: 20 80
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Object
     - Definition
   * - :class:`~torch.utils.data.Dataset`
     - The PyTorch :class:`~torch.utils.data.Dataset` represents a map from keys to data samples.
   * - :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader`
     - The PyTorch :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader` represents a Python iterable over a DataSet.
   * - :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule`
     - A :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` is simply a collection of a training DataLoader, validation DataLoader(s) and test DataLoader(s), along with the matching transforms and data processing/downloads steps required.

Read :ref:`this <datamodules>` for more details on LightningDataModules.

.. _multiple-training-dataloaders:

*****************

> Multiple DataSets

Reviewer: I have never seen this spelling. 
Can we use the more common one? 
Meaning, if we want to indicate a relation to the dataset class in PyTorch, use the spelling "Dataset" or when talking about general datasets, just lowercase "dataset".

*****************

> There are a few ways to pass multiple DataSets to Lightning:

Reviewer: The LightningModule was only mentioned once, and the first section here jumps right into multiple dataloaders. 
Wouldn't it make sense to introduce the DataModule first and give a motivation for using it?
After all, this document is under guides and indexed in the menu under "best practices".

            # [batch from loader_a, batch from loader_b]
            loaders = [loader_a, loader_b]

            return loaders

Furthermore, Lightning also supports nested lists and dicts (or a combination).

.. testcode::

    class LitModel(LightningModule):

        def train_dataloader(self):

            loader_a = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(8), batch_size=4)
            loader_b = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(16), batch_size=2)

            return {'a': loader_a, 'b': loader_b}

        def training_step(self, batch, batch_idx):
            # access a dictionnary with a batch from each DataLoader
            batch_a = batch["a"]
            batch_b = batch["b"]

.. testcode::

    class LitModel(LightningModule):

        def train_dataloader(self):

            loader_a = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(8), batch_size=4)
            loader_b = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(16), batch_size=4)
            loader_c = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(32), batch_size=4)
            loader_c = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(64), batch_size=4)

            # pass loaders as a nested dict. This will create batches like this:
            loaders = {

>                 'loaders_a_b': {
>                     'a': loader_a,
>                     'b': loader_b
>                 },
>                 'loaders_c_d': {
>                     'c': loader_c,
>                     'd': loader_d
>                 }
>             }
>             return loaders
> 
>         def training_step(self, batch, batch_idx):
>             # access the data
>             batch_a_b = batch["loaders_a_b"]
>             batch_c_d = batch["loaders_c_d"]
> 
>             batch_a = batch_a_b["a"]
>             batch_b = batch_a_b["a"]
> 
>             batch_c = batch_c_d["c"]
>             batch_d = batch_c_d["d"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                'loaders_a_b': [
                    loader_a,
                    loader_b
                ],
                'loaders_c_d': {
                    'c': loader_c,
                    'd': loader_d
                }
            }
            return loaders

        def training_step(self, batch, batch_idx):
            # access the data
            batch_a_b = batch["loaders_a_b"]
            batch_c_d = batch["loaders_c_d"]

            batch_a = batch_a_b[0]
            batch_b = batch_a_b[1]

            batch_c = batch_c_d["c"]
            batch_d = batch_c_d["d"]
```

Read :ref:`this <datamodules>` for more details on LightningDataModules.

.. _multiple-training-dataloaders:

*****************
Multiple Datasets
*****************

There are a few ways to pass multiple Datasets to Lightning:

1. Create a DataLoader that iterates over multiple Datasets under the hood.
2. In the training loop you can pass multiple DataLoaders as a dict or list/tuple and Lightning
   will automatically combine the batches from different DataLoaders.
3. In the validation and test loop you have the option to return multiple DataLoaders,
   which Lightning will call sequentially.

Using LightningDataModule
=========================
You can set multiple DataLoaders in your :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule`, and Lightning will handle the

> combination batch under-the-hood.

Reviewer 3: will Lightning handle combining the batches under the hood or the combination of batches sent by multiple DataLoaders? Not clear from the last part of the sentence.

.. testsetup:: *

    from pytorch_lightning.core.Lightning import LightningModule
    from torch.utils.data import IterableDataSet
    from pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer import Trainer

.. _data:

#############
Managing Data
#############

Continue reading to learn about:

* `<Data Containers in Lightning_>`_

> * `Iterate over multiple datasets <Multiple DataSets_>`_

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `Iterating over multiple datasets <Multiple DataSets_>`_
```

Reviewer 5: Done !

> * `Handle sequential data <Sequential Data_>`_

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `Handling sequential data <Sequential Data_>`_
```

Reviewer 5: Done !

****************************
Data Containers in Lightning
****************************

There are a few different data containers used in Lightning:

.. list-table:: Data objects
   :widths: 20 80
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Object
     - Definition
   * - :class:`~torch.utils.data.Dataset`
     - The PyTorch :class:`~torch.utils.data.Dataset` represents a map from keys to data samples.
   * - :class:`~torch.utils.data.IterableDataset`
     - The PyTorch :class:`~torch.utils.data.IterableDataset` represents a stream of data.
   * - :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader`
     - The PyTorch :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader` represents a Python iterable over a DataSet.
   * - :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule`

>      - A :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` is simply a collection of a training DataLoader, validation DataLoader(s) and test DataLoader(s), along with the matching transforms and data processing/downloads steps required.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     - A :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` is simply a collection of: a training DataLoader, validation DataLoader(s), and test DataLoader(s), along with the matching transforms and data processing/downloads steps required.
```

Reviewer 5: Done !

> Why LightningDataModules
> ========================

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Why LightningDataModules?
=========================
```

Reviewer 5: Done !

> :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` were designed as a way of decoupling data-related hooks from the :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.lightning.LightningModule` so you can develop dataset agnostic models. DataModules make it easy to hot swap different datasets with your model, so you can test it and benchmark it across domains. It also makes sharing and reusing the exact data splits and transforms across projects possible.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` was designed as a way of decoupling data-related hooks from the :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.lightning.LightningModule` so you can develop dataset agnostic models. The :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` makes it easy to hot swap different datasets with your model, so you can test it and benchmark it across domains. It also makes sharing and reusing the exact data splits and transforms across projects possible.
```

Reviewer 5: Done !

Read :ref:`this <datamodules>` for more details on LightningDataModules.

.. _multiple-training-dataloaders:

*****************
Multiple Datasets
*****************

There are a few ways to pass multiple Datasets to Lightning:

1. Create a DataLoader that iterates over multiple Datasets under the hood.
2. In the training loop you can pass multiple DataLoaders as a dict or list/tuple and Lightning
   will automatically combine the batches from different DataLoaders.
3. In the validation and test loop you have the option to return multiple DataLoaders,
   which Lightning will call sequentially.

Using LightningDataModule
=========================

> You can set multiple :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader` in your :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` using its dataloader hooks

Reviewer 4: Maybe:
```suggestion
You can set more than one :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader` in your :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` using its dataloader hooks
```

Reviewer 5: Done !

The default mode for validation and test DataLoaders is sequential.

See the following for more details for the default sequential option:

- :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule.val_dataloader`
- :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule.test_dataloader`

.. testcode::

    def val_dataloader(self):
        loader_1 = DataLoader()
        loader_2 = DataLoader()
        return [loader_1, loader_2]

To combine batches of multiple test and validation DataLoaders simultaneously, one
needs to wrap the DataLoaders with `CombinedLoader`.

.. testcode::

    from pytorch_lightning.trainer.supporters import CombinedLoader

    def val_dataloader(self):
        loader_1 = DataLoader()
        loader_2 = DataLoader()
        loaders = {'a': loader_a,'b': loader_b}
        combined_loaders = CombinedLoader(loaders, "max_size_cycle")
        return combined_loaders

Test with additional data loaders
=================================
You can run inference on a test set even if the :func:`~pytorch_lightning.core.Lightning.LightningModule.test_dataloader` method hasn't been

> defined within your :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.Lightning.LightningModule` instance. For example, rhis would be the case if your test data

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
defined within your :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.Lightning.LightningModule` instance. For example, this would be the case if your test data
```

Reviewer 5: Done !

set is not available at the time your model was declared. Simply pass the test set to the :func:`~pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer.test` method:

.. code-block:: python

    # setup your data loader
    test = DataLoader(...)

    # test (pass in the loader)
    trainer.test(test_dataloaders=test)

--------------

.. _sequences:

***************
Sequential Data
***************

Lightning has built in support for dealing with sequential data.

Packed sequences as inputs
==========================
When using PackedSequence, do 2 things:

1. Return either a padded tensor in dataset or a list of variable length tensors in the DataLoader collate_fn (example shows the list implementation).
2. Pack the sequence in forward or training and validation steps depending on use case.

.. testcode::

    # For use in DataLoader
    def collate_fn(batch):
        x = [item[0] for item in batch]
        y = [item[1] for item in batch]
        return x, y

    # In module
    def training_step(self, batch, batch_nb):
        x = rnn.pack_sequence(batch[0], enforce_sorted=False)
        y = rnn.pack_sequence(batch[1], enforce_sorted=False)

----------

> Truncated Backpropagation Through Time
> ======================================

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Truncated Backpropagation Through Time (TBPTT)
==============================================
```

Reviewer 5: Done !

There are times when multiple backwards passes are needed for each batch.
For example, it may save memory to use Truncated Backpropagation Through Time when training RNNs.

> Lightning can handle TBTT automatically via this flag.

Reviewer 4: We use tbptt in `tbptt_split_batch`, would be good to be consistent with the acronym:
```suggestion
Lightning can handle TBPTT automatically via this flag.
```

Reviewer 5: Done !

.. testsetup:: *

    from pytorch_lightning.core.lightning import LightningModule
    from torch.utils.data import IterableDataset

>     from pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer import Trainer

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    from pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer import Trainer
    from torchvision import datasets
```

.. _data:

#############
Managing Data
#############

Continue reading to learn about:

* `<Data Containers in Lightning_>`_

* `Iterating over multiple datasets <Multiple DataSets_>`_

* `Handling sequential data <Sequential Data_>`_

****************************
Data Containers in Lightning
****************************

There are a few different data containers used in Lightning:

.. list-table:: Data objects
   :widths: 20 80
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Object
     - Definition
   * - :class:`~torch.utils.data.Dataset`
     - The PyTorch :class:`~torch.utils.data.Dataset` represents a map from keys to data samples.
   * - :class:`~torch.utils.data.IterableDataset`
     - The PyTorch :class:`~torch.utils.data.IterableDataset` represents a stream of data.
   * - :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader`
     - The PyTorch :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader` represents a Python iterable over a DataSet.
   * - :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule`

>      -  - A :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` is simply a collection of: a training DataLoader, validation DataLoader(s), test DataLoader(s) and predict DataLoader(s), along with the matching transforms and data processing/downloads steps required.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
     -  A :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` is simply a collection of: a training DataLoader, validation DataLoader(s), test DataLoader(s) and predict DataLoader(s), along with the matching transforms and data processing/downloads steps required.
```

=========================

The :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` was designed as a way of decoupling data-related hooks from the :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.lightning.LightningModule` so you can develop dataset agnostic models. The :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` makes it easy to hot swap different datasets with your model, so you can test it and benchmark it across domains. It also makes sharing and reusing the exact data splits and transforms across projects possible.

Read :ref:`this <datamodules>` for more details on LightningDataModules.

.. _multiple-training-dataloaders:

*****************
Multiple Datasets
*****************

There are a few ways to pass multiple Datasets to Lightning:

1. Create a DataLoader that iterates over multiple Datasets under the hood.
2. In the training loop you can pass multiple DataLoaders as a dict or list/tuple and Lightning
   will automatically combine the batches from different DataLoaders.
3. In the validation and test loop you have the option to return multiple DataLoaders,
   which Lightning will call sequentially.

Using LightningDataModule
=========================

> You can more than one :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader` in your :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` using its dataloader hooks

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
You can set more than one :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader` in your :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` using its dataloader hooks
```

and Lightning will use the correct one under-the-hood.

.. testcode::

    class DataModule(LightningDataModule):

        ...

        def train_dataloader(self):
            return torch.utils.data.DataLoader(self.train_dataset)

        def val_dataloader(self):
            return [
                torch.utils.data.DataLoader(self.val_dataset_1),
                torch.utils.data.DataLoader(self.val_dataset_2)
            ]

        def test_dataloader(self):
            return torch.utils.data.DataLoader(self.test_dataset)

        def predict_dataloader(self):
            return torch.utils.data.DataLoader(self.predict_dataset)

Using LightningModule hooks
===========================

Concatenated DataSet
--------------------
For training with multiple datasets you can create a :class:`~torch.utils.data.dataloader` class
which wraps your multiple datasets (this of course also works for testing and validation
datasets).

(`reference <https://discuss.pytorch.org/t/train-simultaneously-on-two-DataSets/649/2>`_)

.. testcode::

>     class ConcatDataSet(torch.utils.data.DataSet):
>         def __init__(self, *DataSets):
>             self.DataSets = DataSets
> 
>         def __getitem__(self, i):
>             return tuple(d[i] for d in self.DataSets)
> 
>         def __len__(self):
>             return min(len(d) for d in self.DataSets)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    class ConcatDataset(torch.utils.data.Dataset):
        def __init__(self, *datasets):
            self.datasets = datasets

        def __getitem__(self, i):
            return tuple(d[i] for d in self.datasets)

        def __len__(self):
            return min(len(d) for d in self.datasets)
```

    class LitModel(LightningModule):

        def train_dataloader(self):

>             concat_DataSet = ConcatDataSet(
>                 DataSets.ImageFolder(traindir_A),
>                 DataSets.ImageFolder(traindir_B)
>             )
> 
>             loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
>                 concat_DataSet,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
            concat_dataset = ConcatDataset(
                datasets.ImageFolder(traindir_A),
                datasets.ImageFolder(traindir_B)
            )

            loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
                concat_dataset,
```

For example, it may save memory to use Truncated Backpropagation Through Time when training RNNs.

Lightning can handle TBPTT automatically via this flag.

.. testcode::

    from pytorch_lightning import LightningModule

    class MyModel(LightningModule):

        def __init__(self):
            super().__init__()
            # Important: This property activates truncated backpropagation through time
            # Setting this value to 2 splits the batch into sequences of size 2
            self.truncated_bptt_steps = 2

        # Truncated back-propagation through time
        def training_step(self, batch, batch_idx, hiddens):
            # the training step must be updated to accept a ``hiddens`` argument
            # hiddens are the hiddens from the previous truncated backprop step
            out, hiddens = self.lstm(data, hiddens)
            return {
                "loss": ...,
                "hiddens": hiddens
            }

.. note:: If you need to modify how the batch is split,
    override :func:`~pytorch_lightning.core.LightningModule.tbptt_split_batch`.

----------

Iterable Datasets
=================

> Lightning supports using IterableDataSets as well as map-style DataSets. IterableDataSets provide a more natural

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Lightning supports using IterableDatasets as well as map-style Datasets. IterableDatasets provide a more natural
```

option when using sequential data.

> .. note:: When using an IterableDataSet you must set the ``val_check_interval`` to 1.0 (the default) or an int
>     (specifying the number of training batches to run before validation) when initializing the Trainer. This is
>     because the IterableDataSet does not have a ``__len__`` and Lightning requires this to calculate the validation

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
.. note:: When using an IterableDataset you must set the ``val_check_interval`` to 1.0 (the default) or an int
    (specifying the number of training batches to run before validation) when initializing the Trainer. This is
    because the IterableDataset does not have a ``__len__`` and Lightning requires this to calculate the validation
```

    interval when ``val_check_interval`` is less than one. Similarly, you can set ``limit_{mode}_batches`` to a float or
    an int. If it is set to 0.0 or 0 it will set ``num_{mode}_batches`` to 0, if it is an int it will set ``num_{mode}_batches``
    to ``limit_{mode}_batches``, if it is set to 1.0 it will run for the whole dataset, otherwise it will throw an exception.
    Here mode can be train/val/test.

.. testcode::

>     # IterableDataSet
>     class CustomDataSet(IterableDataSet):
> 
>         def __init__(self, data):
>             self.data_source
> 
>         def __iter__(self):
>             return iter(self.data_source)
> 
>     # Setup DataLoader
>     def train_dataloader(self):
>         seq_data = ['A', 'long', 'time', 'ago', 'in', 'a', 'galaxy', 'far', 'far', 'away']
>         iterable_dataset = CustomDataSet(seq_data)
> 
>         dataloader = DataLoader(dataset=iterable_dataset, batch_size=5)
>         return dataloader

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    # IterableDataset
    class CustomDataset(IterableDataset):

        def __init__(self, data):
            self.data_source

        def __iter__(self):
            return iter(self.data_source)

    # Setup DataLoader
    def train_dataloader(self):
        seq_data = ['A', 'long', 'time', 'ago', 'in', 'a', 'galaxy', 'far', 'far', 'away']
        iterable_dataset = CustomDataset(seq_data)

        dataloader = DataLoader(dataset=iterable_dataset, batch_size=5)
        return dataloader
```

.. testsetup:: *

    from pytorch_lightning.core.lightning import LightningModule
    from torch.utils.data import IterableDataset
    from pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer import Trainer

>     from torchvision import datasets

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

.. testsetup:: *

    from pytorch_lightning.core.Lightning import LightningModule
    from torch.utils.data import IterableDataSet
    from pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer import Trainer

.. _data:

#############
Managing Data
#############

Continue reading to learn about:

> * `Data Objects in Lightning <Data Objects in Lightning_>`_

Reviewer 5: I personally find those titles a bit confusing.

Author: Can you explain what is confusing? the text or format?

Reviewer 5: `Data Objects` sounds a bit weird to me. Nothing major

> * `Data Objects in Lightning <Data Objects in Lightning_>`_

Reviewer 5: I think adding PyTorch first would be beneficial

Data Objects in PyTorch

Data Objects in Lightning

Reviewer 5: Samples could be added too.

Author: I'm not sure i agree, because lightning supports passing dataloaders as well. Why would you separate?

Reviewer 5: Good ! Resolving this one.

* `Models Defined by Data <Models Defined by Data_>`_

* `Multiple Datasets <Multiple DataSets_>`_

* `Sequential Data <Sequential Data_>`_

*************************
Data Objects in Lightning
*************************

There are a few different Data objects used in Lightning:

.. list-table:: Data objects
   :widths: 20 80
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Object
     - Definition

>    * - :class:`~torch.utils.data.Dataset`

Reviewer 2: If you mention this one, You should also have a one-liner for `torch.utils.data.IterableDataset`

   * - :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader`
     - The PyTorch :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader` represents a Python iterable over a DataSet.
   * - :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule`
     - A :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` is simply a collection of a training DataLoader, validation DataLoader(s) and test DataLoader(s), along with the matching transforms and data processing/downloads steps required.

Creating DataLoaders
====================

To pass in data to Lightning, you'll first need to create a :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader` from a :class:`~torch.utils.data.Dataset`.

For example, here's the PyTorch code for loading an MNIST :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader`:

.. testcode::
    :skipif: not _TORCHVISION_AVAILABLE

    from torch.utils.data import DataLoader, random_split
    from torchvision.datasets import MNIST
    import os
    from torchvision import datasets, transforms

    # transforms
    # prepare transforms standard to MNIST
    transform=transforms.Compose([transforms.ToTensor(),
                                  transforms.Normalize((0.1307,), (0.3081,))])

    # data

>     mnist_train = MNIST(os.getcwd(), train=True, download=True, transform=transform)

Reviewer 2: Should this really be `os.getcwd` and potentially pollute the users current dir or should we use `tempfile.mkdtemp()` instead?

            mnist_val = ...
            return DataLoader(mnist_val, batch_size=64)

        def test_dataloader(self):
            transforms = ...
            mnist_test = ...
            return DataLoader(mnist_test, batch_size=64)

The :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.lightning.LightningModule` contains the DataLoaders, so there's no need to specify on :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer.fit`.

.. code-block:: python

    model = LitMNIST()
    trainer = Trainer()
    trainer.fit(model)

3. LightningDataModules (recommended)
-------------------------------------
Defining free-floating dataloaders, splits, download instructions, and such can get messy.
We recommend grouping the full definition of the datasets into a :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule` which includes:

- Download instructions
- Processing instructions
- Split instructions
- Train dataloader
- Val dataloader(s)
- Test dataloader(s)

.. testcode::

    class MyDataModule(LightningDataModule):

        def __init__(self):
            super().__init__()
            self.train_dims = None
            self.vocab_size = 0

        def prepare_data(self):

>             # called only on 1 GPU

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            # called only on 1 Process
```

for consistency (see below)

Reviewer 5: called only on rank 0 process

            download_dataset()
            tokenize()
            build_vocab()

        def setup(self, stage: Optional[str] = None):

>             # called on every GPU

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            # called on every Process
```

I think for DP and DDP2 it is only called once since the process manages multiple GPUs

            vocab = load_vocab()
            self.vocab_size = len(vocab)

            self.train, self.val, self.test = load_datasets()
            self.train_dims = self.train.next_batch.size()

        def train_dataloader(self):
            transforms = ...
            return DataLoader(self.train, batch_size=64)

        def val_dataloader(self):
            transforms = ...
            return DataLoader(self.val, batch_size=64)

>         def test_dataloader(self):
>             transforms = ...
>             return DataLoader(self.test, batch_size=64)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        def test_dataloader(self):
            transforms = ...
            return DataLoader(self.test, batch_size=64)
            
        def predict_dataloader(self):
            transforms = ...
            return DataLoader(self.predict, batch_size=64)
```

> Using DataModules allows easier sharing of full :class:`~torch.utils.data.Dataset` definitions.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
DataModules are easier to re-use compared to pure :class:`~torch.utils.data.Dataset` definitions.
```

.. code-block:: python

    # use an MNIST dataset
    mnist_dm = MNISTDatamodule()
    model = LitModel(num_classes=mnist_dm.num_classes)
    trainer.fit(model, mnist_dm)

    # or other datasets with the same model
    imagenet_dm = ImagenetDatamodule()
    model = LitModel(num_classes=imagenet_dm.num_classes)
    trainer.fit(model, imagenet_dm)

.. note:: :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule.prepare_data` is called on only one GPU in distributed training (automatically)
.. note:: :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule.setup` is called on every GPU (automatically)

Read :ref:`this <datamodules>` for more details on LightningDataModules.

---------------

**********************

> Models Defined by Data

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Dynamically configuring Models using Data
```

            tokenize()

        def setup(self, stage: Optional[str] = None):
            # step is either 'fit', 'validate', 'test', or 'predict'. 90% of the time not relevant
            data = load_data()
            num_classes = data.classes
            self.l1 = nn.Linear(..., num_classes)

--------------

.. _multiple-training-dataloaders:

*****************
Multiple DataSets
*****************

There are a few ways to pass multiple DataSets to Lightning:

1. Create a :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader` that iterates over multiple DataSets under the hood.
2. In the training loop you can pass multiple DataLoaders as a dict or list/tuple and Lightning
   will automatically combine the batches from different DataLoaders.
3. In the validation and test loop you have the option to return multiple DataLoaders,
   which Lightning will call sequentially.

Using LightningDataModule
=========================
You can set multiple DataLoaders in your :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule`, and Lightning will handle the
combination batch under-the-hood.

TODO: add code snippet.

Using LightningModule hooks
===========================

> Concatenated DataSet

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Concatenated Dataset
```

--------------------

> For training with multiple Datasets you can create a :class:`~torch.utils.data.dataloader` class

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For training with multiple Datasets you can create a :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader` class
```

which wraps your multiple DataSets (this of course also works for testing and validation

> DataSets).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Datasets).
```

(`reference <https://discuss.pytorch.org/t/train-simultaneously-on-two-DataSets/649/2>`_)

.. testcode::

>     class ConcatDataSet(torch.utils.data.DataSet):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    class ConcatDataset(torch.utils.data.Dataset):
```

>         def __init__(self, *DataSets):
>             self.DataSets = DataSets
> 
>         def __getitem__(self, i):
>             return tuple(d[i] for d in self.DataSets)
> 
>         def __len__(self):
>             return min(len(d) for d in self.DataSets)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        def __init__(self, *datasets):
            self.datasets = datasets

        def __getitem__(self, i):
            return tuple(d[i] for d in self.datadets)

        def __len__(self):
            return min(len(d) for d in self.datadets)
```

according to pep8, variable names should be lower case and snake_case.

    class LitModel(LightningModule):

        def train_dataloader(self):

>             concat_DataSet = ConcatDataSet(
>                 DataSets.ImageFolder(traindir_A),
>                 DataSets.ImageFolder(traindir_B)
>             )
> 
>             loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
>                 concat_DataSet,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            concat_dataset = ConcatDataset(
                datasets.ImageFolder(traindir_A),
                datasets.ImageFolder(traindir_B)
            )

            loader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
                concat_dataset,
```

                batch_size=args.batch_size,
                shuffle=True,
                num_workers=args.workers,
                pin_memory=True
            )
            return loader

        def val_dataloader(self):
            # SAME
            ...

        def test_dataloader(self):
            # SAME
            ...

Return multiple DataLoaders
---------------------------
You can set multiple DataLoaders in your :class:`~pytorch_lightning.core.lightning.LightningModule`, and Lightning will take care of batch combination.

For more details please have a look at :paramref:`~pytorch_lightning.trainer.trainer.Trainer.Trainer.multiple_trainloader_mode`

.. testcode::

    class LitModel(LightningModule):

>         def train_dataloader(self):
> 
>             loader_a = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(6), batch_size=4)
>             loader_b = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(15), batch_size=5)
> 
>             # pass loaders as a dict. This will create batches like this:
>             # {'a': batch from loader_a, 'b': batch from loader_b}
>             loaders = {'a': loader_a,
>                        'b': loader_b}
> 
>             # OR:
>             # pass loaders as sequence. This will create batches like this:
>             # [batch from loader_a, batch from loader_b]
>             loaders = [loader_a, loader_b]
> 
>             return loaders

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        def train_dataloader(self):

            loader_a = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(6), batch_size=4)
            loader_b = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(15), batch_size=5)

            # pass loaders as a dict. This will create batches like this:
            # {'a': batch from loader_a, 'b': batch from loader_b}
            loaders = {'a': loader_a,
                       'b': loader_b}

            # OR:
            # pass loaders as sequence. This will create batches like this:
            # [batch from loader_a, batch from loader_b]
            loaders = [loader_a, loader_b]

            return loaders
            
        def training_step(self, batch, batch_idx):
             # access a list with a batch from each DataLoader
             batch_a, batch_b = batch
```

Furthermore, Lightning also supports nested lists and dicts (or a combination).

.. testcode::

    class LitModel(LightningModule):

        def train_dataloader(self):

            loader_a = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(8), batch_size=4)
            loader_b = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(16), batch_size=2)

            return {'a': loader_a, 'b': loader_b}

        def training_step(self, batch, batch_idx):
            # access a dictionnary with a batch from each DataLoader
            batch_a = batch["a"]
            batch_b = batch["b"]

.. testcode::

    class LitModel(LightningModule):

        def train_dataloader(self):

            loader_a = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(8), batch_size=4)
            loader_b = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(16), batch_size=4)
            loader_c = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(32), batch_size=4)
            loader_c = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(range(64), batch_size=4)

            # pass loaders as a nested dict. This will create batches like this:

>             loaders = {

Reviewer 2: Can we at least at one level convert the dict to a list to show that these can also be mixed?
If yes, the data calls in the trainstep would have to be adjusted as well :)

Author: feel free to suggest a fix i'm not sure exactly what you mean!

Reviewer 2: @edenlightning done (see comment few lines below) :)

                'loaders_a_b': {
                    'a': loader_a,
                    'b': loader_b
                },
                'loaders_c_d': {
                    'c': loader_c,
                    'd': loader_d
                }
            }
            return loaders

        def training_step(self, batch, batch_idx):
            # access the data
            batch_a_b = batch["loaders_a_b"]
            batch_c_d = batch["loaders_c_d"]

            batch_a = batch_a_b["a"]
            batch_b = batch_a_b["a"]

            batch_c = batch_c_d["c"]
            batch_d = batch_c_d["d"]

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

Currently, Lightning supports two different schemes for combining your dataloaders (controlloed by the ``multiple_trainloader_mode`` flag on the trainer: In ``max_size_cycle`` mode, the trainer ends one epoch when the largest dataset is traversed, and smaller datasets reload when running out of their data. In ``min_size`` mode, all the datasets reload when reaching the minimum length of datasets. 
```

parameter can be used in conjunction with any of the above use cases. You can choose to pass
the batches sequentially or simultaneously, as is done for the training step.
The default mode for validation and test DataLoaders is sequential.

See the following for more details for the default sequential option:

- :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule.val_dataloader`
- :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule.test_dataloader`

.. testcode::

    def val_dataloader(self):
        loader_1 = DataLoader()
        loader_2 = DataLoader()
        return [loader_1, loader_2]

To combine batches of multiple test and validation DataLoaders simultaneously, one
needs to wrap the DataLoaders with `CombinedLoader`.

.. testcode::

    from pytorch_lightning.trainer.supporters import CombinedLoader

    def val_dataloader(self):
        loader_1 = DataLoader()
        loader_2 = DataLoader()
        loaders = {'a': loader_a,'b': loader_b}
        combined_loaders = CombinedLoader(loaders, "max_size_cycle")
        return combined_loaders

> Test with additional data loaders

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Test with additional dataloaders
```
consistency :)

There are times when multiple backwards passes are needed for each batch.
For example, it may save memory to use Truncated Backpropagation Through Time when training RNNs.

Lightning can handle TBTT automatically via this flag.

.. testcode::

    from pytorch_lightning import LightningModule

    class MyModel(LightningModule):

        def __init__(self):
            super().__init__()
            # Important: This property activates truncated backpropagation through time
            # Setting this value to 2 splits the batch into sequences of size 2
            self.truncated_bptt_steps = 2

        # Truncated back-propagation through time
        def training_step(self, batch, batch_idx, hiddens):
            # the training step must be updated to accept a ``hiddens`` argument
            # hiddens are the hiddens from the previous truncated backprop step
            out, hiddens = self.lstm(data, hiddens)
            return {
                "loss": ...,
                "hiddens": hiddens
            }

.. note:: If you need to modify how the batch is split,
    override :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.LightningModule.tbptt_split_batch`.

----------

> Iterable DataSets
> =================
> Lightning supports using IterableDataSets as well as map-style DataSets. IterableDataSets provide a more natural
> option when using sequential data.
> 
> .. note:: When using an IterableDataSet you must set the ``val_check_interval`` to 1.0 (the default) or an int
>     (specifying the number of training batches to run before validation) when initializing the Trainer. This is
>     because the IterableDataSet does not have a ``__len__`` and Lightning requires this to calculate the validation
>     interval when ``val_check_interval`` is less than one. Similarly, you can set ``limit_{mode}_batches`` to a float or
>     an int. If it is set to 0.0 or 0 it will set ``num_{mode}_batches`` to 0, if it is an int it will set ``num_{mode}_batches``
>     to ``limit_{mode}_batches``, if it is set to 1.0 it will run for the whole DataSet, otherwise it will throw an exception.
>     Here mode can be train/val/test.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Iterable Datasets
=================
Lightning supports using IterableDatasets as well as map-style Datasets. IterableDatasets provide a more natural
option when using sequential data.

.. note:: When using an IterableDataset you must set the ``val_check_interval`` to 1.0 (the default) or an int
    (specifying the number of training batches to run before validation) when initializing the Trainer. This is
    because the IterableDataset does not have a ``__len__`` and Lightning requires this to calculate the validation
    interval when ``val_check_interval`` is less than one. Similarly, you can set ``limit_{mode}_batches`` to a float or
    an int. If it is set to 0.0 or 0 it will set ``num_{mode}_batches`` to 0, if it is an int it will set ``num_{mode}_batches``
    to ``limit_{mode}_batches``, if it is set to 1.0 it will run for the whole Dataset, otherwise it will throw an exception.
    Here mode can be train/val/test.
```

.. testcode::

>     # IterableDataSet
>     class CustomDataSet(IterableDataSet):
> 
>         def __init__(self, data):
>             self.data_source
> 
>         def __iter__(self):
>             return iter(self.data_source)
> 
>     # Setup DataLoader
>     def train_dataloader(self):
>         seq_data = ['A', 'long', 'time', 'ago', 'in', 'a', 'galaxy', 'far', 'far', 'away']
>         iterable_DataSet = CustomDataSet(seq_data)
> 
>         dataloader = DataLoader(DataSet=iterable_DataSet, batch_size=5)
>         return dataloader

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    # IterableDataSet
    class CustomDataset(IterableDataset):

        def __init__(self, data):
            self.data_source

        def __iter__(self):
            return iter(self.data_source)

    class LitModel(LightningModule):
        # Setup DataLoader
        def train_dataloader(self):
            seq_data = ['A', 'long', 'time', 'ago', 'in', 'a', 'galaxy', 'far', 'far', 'away']
            iterable_dataset = CustomDataset(seq_data)

            dataloader = DataLoader(Dataset=iterable_dataset, batch_size=5)
            return dataloader
```

DataModules are easier to re-use compared to pure :class:`~torch.utils.data.Dataset` definitions.

.. code-block:: python

    # use an MNIST dataset
    mnist_dm = MNISTDatamodule()
    model = LitModel(num_classes=mnist_dm.num_classes)
    trainer.fit(model, mnist_dm)

    # or other datasets with the same model
    imagenet_dm = ImagenetDatamodule()
    model = LitModel(num_classes=imagenet_dm.num_classes)
    trainer.fit(model, imagenet_dm)

.. note:: :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule.prepare_data` is called on only one GPU in distributed training (automatically)
.. note:: :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule.setup` is called on every GPU (automatically)

Read :ref:`this <datamodules>` for more details on LightningDataModules.

---------------

*****************************************
Dynamically Configuring Models using Data
*****************************************

When your models need to know about the data, it's best to process the data before passing it to the model.

.. code-block:: python

    # init dm AND call the processing manually
    dm = ImagenetDataModule()
    dm.prepare_data()

>     dm.setup()

Reviewer 6: in this case, the guarantee that this is called on every process is no longer satsified, right?

Reviewer 5: Yes, I don't think it is. It could be if we were wrapping the setup function and checking the rank.

Author: should i add a comment?

    model = LitModel(out_features=dm.num_classes, img_width=dm.img_width, img_height=dm.img_height)
    trainer.fit(model, dm)

1. use :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule.prepare_data` to download and process the :class:`~torch.utils.data.Dataset`.
2. use :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule.setup` to do splits, and build your model internals

An alternative to using a DataModule is to defer initialization of the models modules to the :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.datamodule.LightningDataModule.setup` method of your LightningModule as follows:

.. testcode::

    class LitMNIST(LightningModule):

        def __init__(self):
            self.l1 = None

        def prepare_data(self):
            download_data()
            tokenize()

        def setup(self, stage: Optional[str] = None):

>             # step is either 'fit', 'validate', 'test', or 'predict'. 90% of the time not relevant

Reviewer 6: as a user, i dont know what "the 90% of the time not relevant" means. when is it relevant? and if its not relevant most of the time, why is it an argument at all? is https://github.com/PyTorchLightning/pytorch-lightning/issues/6420 a better approach?

use cases where stage today is relevant:
- If the stage is "fit", then I don't need to worry about setting up test data. this can be expanded for validate/test/predict, basically mapping trainer functions to running stages

are there others that we should highlight?

            data = load_data()
            num_classes = data.classes
            self.l1 = nn.Linear(..., num_classes)

--------------

.. _multiple-training-dataloaders:

*****************

> Multiple DataSets

Reviewer 6: nit: consistency between DataSet vs Dataset
```suggestion
Multiple Datasets
```

*****************

There are a few ways to pass multiple DataSets to Lightning:

> 1. Create a :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader` that iterates over multiple DataSets under the hood.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1. Create a :class:`~torch.utils.data.DataLoader` that iterates over multiple Datasets under the hood.
```

        y = rnn.pack_sequence(batch[1], enforce_sorted=False)

----------

Truncated Backpropagation Through Time
======================================
There are times when multiple backwards passes are needed for each batch.
For example, it may save memory to use Truncated Backpropagation Through Time when training RNNs.

Lightning can handle TBTT automatically via this flag.

.. testcode::

    from pytorch_lightning import LightningModule

    class MyModel(LightningModule):

        def __init__(self):
            super().__init__()
            # Important: This property activates truncated backpropagation through time
            # Setting this value to 2 splits the batch into sequences of size 2
            self.truncated_bptt_steps = 2

        # Truncated back-propagation through time
        def training_step(self, batch, batch_idx, hiddens):
            # the training step must be updated to accept a ``hiddens`` argument
            # hiddens are the hiddens from the previous truncated backprop step
            out, hiddens = self.lstm(data, hiddens)
            return {
                "loss": ...,
                "hiddens": hiddens
            }

> 

Reviewer 6: why is this here? it doesn't feel like it belongs

.. note:: If you need to modify how the batch is split,
    override :meth:`~pytorch_lightning.core.LightningModule.tbptt_split_batch`.

----------

Iterable Datasets
=================
Lightning supports using IterableDatasets as well as map-style Datasets. IterableDatasets provide a more natural

> option when using sequential data.

Reviewer 6: this feels odd at the very end of the guide. iterable datasets should be covered as part of the pytorch data reading. does it need to be repeated again here?

.. note:: When using an IterableDataset you must set the ``val_check_interval`` to 1.0 (the default) or an int
    (specifying the number of training batches to run before validation) when initializing the Trainer. This is
    because the IterableDataset does not have a ``__len__`` and Lightning requires this to calculate the validation
    interval when ``val_check_interval`` is less than one. Similarly, you can set ``limit_{mode}_batches`` to a float or
    an int. If it is set to 0.0 or 0 it will set ``num_{mode}_batches`` to 0, if it is an int it will set ``num_{mode}_batches``
    to ``limit_{mode}_batches``, if it is set to 1.0 it will run for the whole Dataset, otherwise it will throw an exception.

>     Here mode can be train/val/test.

Reviewer 6: is this related to the dataset/dataloader, or training loop behavior and how to shortcircuit different epochs?

Author: Not sure what the question is?

Author: not sure what you are reffering to?

.. testcode::

>     # IterableDataSet

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    # IterableDataset
```
